% Development of the Phonograph at Alexander Graham Bell's Volta Laboratory
% Leslie J. Newville
% September 27, 2009

# Preface {-}
The Project Gutenberg eBook, Development of the Phonograph at Alexander
Graham Bell's Volta Laboratory, by Leslie J. Newville


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Development of the Phonograph at Alexander Graham Bell's Volta Laboratory
       Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology, United States National Museum Bulletin 218, Paper 5, (pages 69-79)


Author: Leslie J. Newville



Release Date: September 27, 2009  [eBook #30112]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEVELOPMENT OF THE PHONOGRAPH AT
ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL'S VOLTA LABORATORY***


E-text prepared by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Stephanie Eason, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 30112-h.htm or 30112-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/30112/30112-h/30112-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/30112/30112-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      Passages in italics are enclosed between underscores
      (_italics_).

      Additional spacing after some of the quotations is intentional
      to indicate both the end of a quotation and the beginning of a
      new paragraph as presented in the original text.


Contributions from the Museum of History and Technology,
United States National Museum Bulletin 218,
Paper 5, (pages 69-79)

DEVELOPMENT OF THE
 PHONOGRAPH AT
ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL'S VOLTA LABORATORY

LESLIE J. NEWVILLE


DEVELOPMENT OF THE PHONOGRAPH
AT ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL'S
VOLTA LABORATORY

by

LESLIE J. NEWVILLE



# Beginning {-}


     _The fame of Thomas A. Edison rests most securely on his genius for
     making practical application of the ideas of others. However, it
     was Alexander Graham Bell, long a Smithsonian Regent and friend of
     its third Secretary S. P. Langley, who, with his Volta Laboratory
     associates made practical the phonograph, which has been called
     Edison's most original invention._

     THE AUTHOR: _Leslie J. Newville wrote this paper while he was
     attached to the office of the curator of Science and Technology in
     the Smithsonian Institution's United States National Museum._


The story of Alexander Graham Bell's invention of the telephone has been
told and retold. How he became involved in the difficult task of making
practical phonograph records, and succeeded (in association with Charles
Sumner Tainter and Chichester Bell), is not so well known.

But material collected through the years by the U. S. National Museum of
the Smithsonian Institution now makes clear how Bell and two associates
took Edison's tinfoil machine and made it reproduce sound from wax
instead of tinfoil. They began their work in Washington, D. C., in 1879,
and continued until granted basic patents in 1886 for recording in wax.

Preserved at the Smithsonian are some 20 pieces of experimental
apparatus, including a number of complete machines. Their first
experimental machine was sealed in a box and deposited in the
Smithsonian archives in 1881. The others were delivered by Alexander
Graham Bell to the National Museum in two lots in 1915 and 1922. Bell
was an old man by this time, busy with his aeronautical experiments in
Nova Scotia.

It was not until 1947, however, that the Museum received the key to the
experimental "Graphophones," as they were called to differentiate them
from the Edison machine. In that year Mrs. Laura F. Tainter donated to
the Museum 10 bound notebooks, along with Tainter's unpublished
autobiography.[1] This material describes in detail the strange machines
and even stranger experiments which led in 1886 to a greatly improved
phonograph.

Thomas A. Edison had invented the phonograph in 1877. But the fame
bestowed on Edison for this startling invention (sometimes called his
most original) was not due to its efficiency. Recording with the tinfoil
phonograph is too difficult to be practical. The tinfoil tears easily,
and even when the stylus is properly adjusted, the reproduction is
distorted and squeaky, and good for only a few playbacks. Nevertheless
young Edison, the "wizard" as he was called, had hit upon a secret of
which men had dreamed for centuries.[2] Immediately after this
discovery, however, he did not improve it, allegedly because of an
agreement to spend the next five years developing the New York City
electric light and power system.


[Illustration: Figure 1.--CHARLES SUMNER TAINTER (1854-1940) from a
photograph taken in San Diego, California, 1919. (_Smithsonian photo
42729-A._)]


Meanwhile Bell, always a scientist and experimenter at heart, after his
invention of the telephone in 1876 was looking for new worlds to
conquer. If we accept Tainter's version of the story, it was through
Gardiner Green Hubbard that Bell took up the phonograph challenge. Bell
had married Hubbard's daughter Mabel in 1879. Hubbard was then president
of the Edison Speaking Phonograph Co., and his organization, which had
purchased the Edison patent, was having trouble with its finances
because people did not like to buy a machine which seldom worked well
and proved difficult for an unskilled person to operate.

In 1879 Hubbard got Bell interested in improving the machine, and it was
agreed that a laboratory should be set up in Washington. Experiments
were also to be conducted on the transmission of sound by light, and
this resulted in the selenium-cell Photophone, patented in 1881. Both
the Hubbards and the Bells decided to move to the Capital. While Bell
took his bride to Europe for an extended honeymoon, his associate
Charles Sumner Tainter, a young instrument maker, was sent on to
Washington from Cambridge, Massachusetts, to start the laboratory.[3]
Bell's cousin, Chichester Bell, who had been teaching college chemistry
in London, agreed to come as the third associate. During his stay in
Europe Bell received the 50,000-franc ($10,000) Volta prize, and it was
with this money that the Washington project, the Volta Laboratory
Association,[4] was financed.


[Illustration: Figure 2.--PHOTOGRAPHING SOUND IN 1884. A rare photograph
taken at Volta Laboratory, Washington, D. C., by J. Harris Rogers, a
friend of Bell and Tainter (_Smithsonian photo 44312-E_).

A description of the procedure used is found on page 67, of Tainter's
unpublished autobiography (see footnote 1). There, Tainter quotes
Chichester Bell as follows:

"A jet of bichromate of potash solution, vibrated by the voice, was
directed against a glass plate immediately in front of a slit, on which
light was concentrated by means of a lens. The jet was so arranged that
the light on its way to the slit had to pass through the nappe and as
the thickness of this was constantly changing, the illumination of the
slit was also varied. By means of a lens ... an image of this slit was
thrown upon a rotating gelatine-bromide plate, on which accordingly a
record of the voice vibrations was obtained."]


Tainter's story, in his autobiography, of the establishment of the
laboratory, shows its comparative simplicity:

I therefore wound up my business affairs in Cambridge, packed up all of
my tools and machines, and ... went to Washington, and after much
search, rented a vacant house on L Street, between 13th and 14th
Streets, and fitted it up for our purpose.[5]... The Smithsonian
Institution sent us over a mail sack of scientific books from the
library of the Institution, to consult, and primed with all we could
learn ... we went to work.[6]... We were like the explorers in an
entirely unknown land, where one has to select the path that seems to be
most likely to get you to your destination, with no knowledge of what is
ahead.

In conducting our work we had first to design an experimental apparatus,
then hunt about, often in Philadelphia and New York, for the materials
with which to construct it, which were usually hard to find, and finally
build the models we needed, ourselves.[7]


[Illustration: Figure 3.--PAGE FROM NOTEBOOK of Charles Sumner Tainter,
describing an experiment in sound recording. The Tainter notebooks,
preserved in the U. S. National Museum, describe experiments at the
Volta Laboratory, in the 1880's. The Graphophone patents of 1886, were
the result of this research. (_Smithsonian photo 44312_.)]


The experimental machines built at the Volta Laboratory include both
disc and cylinder types, and an interesting "tape" recorder. The records
used with the machines and now in the collections of the U. S. National
Museum, are believed to be the oldest reproducible records preserved
anywhere in the world. While some are scratched and cracked, others are
still in good condition.

By 1881 the Volta associates had succeeded in improving an Edison
tinfoil machine to some extent. Wax was put in the grooves of the heavy
iron cylinder, and no tinfoil was used. Rather than apply for a patent
at that time, however, they deposited the machine in a sealed box at the
Smithsonian, and specified that it was not to be opened without the
consent of two of the three men. In 1937 Tainter (fig. 1) was the only
one still living, so the box was opened with his permission.

For the occasion, the heirs of Alexander Graham Bell gathered in
Washington, but Tainter was too old and too ill to come from San Diego.

The sound vibrations had been indented in the wax which had been applied
to the Edison phonograph. The following is the text of the recording:
"There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamed of
in your philosophy. I am a graphophone and my mother was a phonograph."
Remarked Mrs. Gilbert Grosvenor,[8] Bell's daughter, when the box was
opened in 1937, "That is just the sort of thing father would have said.
He was always quoting from the classics."


[Figure 4.--PATENT DRAWINGS from U. S. patent 341214, granted May 4,
1886, to Chichester Bell and C. S. Tainter.]


The method of reproduction used on the machine, however, is even more
interesting than the quotation. Rather than a stylus and diaphragm, a
jet of air under high pressure was used.

"This evening about 7 P. M.," Tainter noted on July 7, 1881, "The
apparatus being ready the valve upon the top of the air cylinder was
opened slightly until a pressure of about 100 lbs. was indicated by the
gage. The phonograph cylinder was then rotated, and the sounds produced
by the escaping air could be heard, and the words understood a distance
of at least 8 feet from the phonograph." The point of the jet is glass,
and could be directed at a single groove.


[Illustration: Figure 5.--EXPERIMENTAL GRAPHOPHONE photographed in 1884
at the Volta Laboratory. This is similar to one preserved at the
Smithsonian Institution. (_Smithsonian photo 44312-D._)]


The other experimental Graphophones indicate an amazing range of
experimentation. While the method of cutting a record on wax was the one
later exploited commercially, everything else seems to have been tried
at least once.

The following was noted on Wednesday, March 20, 1881: "A fountain pen is
attached to a diaphragm so as to be vibrated in a plane parallel to the
axis of a cylinder--The ink used in this pen to contain iron in a finely
divided state, and the pen caused to trace a spiral line around the
cylinder as it turned. The cylinder to be covered with a sheet of paper
upon which the record is made.... This ink ... can be rendered magnetic
by means of a permanent magnet. The sounds were to be reproduced by
simply substituting a magnet for the fountain pen...."

The result of these ideas for magnetic reproduction resulted in patent
341287, granted on May 4, 1886; it deals solely with "the reproduction,
through the action of magnetism, of sounds by means of records in solid
substances."


[Illustration: Figure 6.--ANOTHER EXPERIMENTAL GRAPHOPHONE, photographed
at the Volta Laboratory in 1884. (_Smithsonian photo 44312-F._)]


The air jet used in reproducing has already been described. Other jets,
of molten metal, wax, and water, were also tried. On Saturday, May 19,
1883, Tainter wrote (see fig. 3):

     Made the following experiment today:

     The cylinder of the Edison phonograph was covered with the coating
     of paraffine-wax and then turned off true and smooth.

     A cutting style A., secured to the end of a lever B was then
     adjusted over the cylinder, as shown. Lever B was pivoted at the
     points C-D, and the only pressure exerted to force the style into
     the wax was due to the weight of the parts.

     Upon the top of A was fixed a small brass disk, and immediately
     over it a sensitive water jet adjusted, so that the stream of water
     at its sensitive part fell upon the center of the brass disk.

     The Phonograph cylinder E, was rotated while words and sounds were
     shouted to the support to which the water jet was attached, and a
     record that was quite visible to the unaided eye was the result.


The tape recorder, an unusual instrument which recorded mechanically on
a 3/16-inch strip of wax-covered paper, is one of the machines described
and illustrated in U. S. patent 341214, dated May 4, 1886 (see fig. 4).
The strip was coated by dipping it in a solution of beeswax and
paraffine (one part white beeswax, two parts paraffine, by weight), then
scraping one side clean and allowing the other side to harden.


[Illustration: Figure 7.--ORIGINAL PLANS FOR A DISC GRAPHOPHONE PATENTED
BY SUMNER TAINTER IN 1888, U. S. PATENT 385886.]


The machine of sturdy wood and metal construction, is hand powered by
means of a knob fastened to the fly wheel. From the fly-wheel shaft
power is transferred by a small friction wheel to a vertical shaft. At
the bottom of this shaft a V-pulley transfers motion by belts to
corresponding V-pulleys beneath the horizontal reels.

The wax strip passes from one 8-inch reel around the periphery of a
pulley (with guide flanges) mounted above the V-pulleys on the main
vertical shaft, where it comes in contact with the recording or
reproducing stylus. It is then taken up on the other reel.

The sharp recording stylus, actuated by a vibrating mica diaphragm, cuts
the wax from the strip. In reproducing, a dull, loosely mounted stylus,
attached to a rubber diaphragm, carried sounds through an ear tube to
the listener.

Both recording and reproducing heads, mounted alternately on the same
two posts, could be adjusted vertically so that several records could be
cut on the same 3/16-inch strip.

While this machine was never developed commercially, it is an
interesting ancestor of the modern tape recorder, which it resembles
somewhat in design. How practical it was or just why it was built we do
not know. The tape is now brittle, the heavy paper reels warped, and the
reproducing head missing. Otherwise, with some reconditioning, it could
be put into working condition.

Most of the disc machines designed by the Volta associates had the disc
mounted vertically (see figs. 5 and 6). The explanation is that in the
early experiments, the turntable, with disc, was mounted on the shop
lathe, along with the recording and reproducing heads. Later, when the
complete models were built, most of them featured vertical turntables.


[Illustration: Figure 8.--ANOTHER PAGE OF THE PLANS SHOWN IN FIGURE 7.
The experimental Graphophone built from these plans is in the U. S.
National Museum (_cat. no. 287665_).]


An interesting exception has a horizontal 7-inch turntable (see figs. 7
and 8). This machine, although made in 1886, is a duplicate of one made
earlier but taken to Europe by Chichester Bell. Tainter was granted U.
S. patent 385886 for it on July 10, 1888.

The playing arm is rigid, except for a pivoted vertical motion of 90
degrees to allow removal of the record or a return to starting position.
While recording or playing, the record not only rotated, but moved
laterally under the stylus, which thus described a spiral, recording 150
grooves to the inch.

The Bell and Tainter records, preserved at the Smithsonian, are both of
the lateral cut and "hill-and-dale" types. Edison for many years used
the "hill-and-dale" method with both cylinder and disc records, and
Emile Berliner is credited with the invention of the lateral cut
Gramophone record in 1887. The Volta associates, however, had been
experimenting with both types, as early as 1881, as is shown by the
following quotation from Tainter:[9]

     The record on the electro-type in the Smithsonian package is of the
     other form, where the vibrations are impressed _parallel_ to the
     surface of the recording material, as was done in the old Scott
     Phonautograph of 1857, thus forming a groove of uniform depth, but
     of wavy character, in which the _sides_ of the groove act upon the
     tracing point instead of the bottom, as is the case in the vertical
     type. This form we named the zig-zag form, and referred to it in
     that way in our notes. Its important advantage in guiding the
     reproducing needle I first called attention to in the note on p.
     9-Vol 1-Home Notes on March 29-1881, and endeavored to use it in my
     early work, but encountered so much difficulty in getting a form of
     reproducer that would work with the soft wax records without
     tearing the groove, we used the hill and valley type of record more
     often than the other.


In 1885, when the Volta associates were sure that they had a number of
practical inventions, they filed applications for patents. They also
began to look around for investors. After giving several demonstrations
in Washington, they gained the necessary support, and the American
Graphophone Co. was organized to manufacture and sell the machines. The
Volta Graphophone Co. was formed to control the patents.

The Howe sewing machine factory at Bridgeport, Connecticut, became the
American Graphophone plant; Tainter went there to supervise the
manufacturing, and continued his inventive work for many years. This
Bridgeport plant is still in use today by a successor firm, the
Dictaphone Corporation.

The work of the Volta associates laid the foundation for the successful
use of the dictating machine in business, for their wax recording
process was practical and their machines sturdy. But it was to take
several more years and the renewed work of Edison and further
developments by Berliner and many others, before the talking machine
industry really got under way and became a major factor in home
entertainment.[10]


PATENTS WHICH RESULTED FROM THE VOLTA LABORATORY ASSOCIATION

  _Patent
  Number_   _Year_        _Patent_                 _Inventors_
  229495     1880    Telephone call register      C. S. Tainter
  235496     1880    Photophone transmitter       A. G. Bell,
                                                    C. S. Tainter
  235497     1880    Selenium cells               A. G. Bell,
                                                    C. S. Tainter
  235590     1800    Selenium cells               C. S. Tainter
  241909     1881    Photophonic receiver         A. G. Bell,
                                                    C. S. Tainter
  243657     1881    Telephone transmitter        C. S. Tainter
  289725     1883    Electric conductor           C. S. Tainter
  336081     1886    Transmitter for electric     C. A. Bell
                       telephone lines
  336082     1886    Jet microphone for           C. A. Bell
                       transmitting sounds
                       by means of jets
  336083     1886    Telephone transmitter        C. A. Bell
  336173     1886    Telephone transmitter        C. S. Tainter
  341212     1886    Reproducing sounds           A. G. Bell,
                       from phonograph              C. A. Bell,
                       records                      C. S. Tainter
  341213     1886    Reproducing and              A. G. Bell,
                       recording sounds by          C. A. Bell,
                       radiant energy               C. S. Tainter
  341214     1886    Recording and reproducing    C. A. Bell,
                       speech and other sounds     C. S. Tainter
  341287     1886    Recording and reproducing    C. S. Tainter
                       sounds
  341288     1886    Apparatus for recording      C. S. Tainter
                       and reproducing sounds
  374133     1887    Paper cylinder for           C. S. Tainter
                      graphophonic records
  375579     1887    Apparatus for recording      C. S. Tainter
                      and reproducing speech
                      and other sounds
  380535     1888    Graphophone                  C. S. Tainter
  385886     1888    Graphophone                  C. S. Tainter
  385887     1888    Graphophonic tablet          C. S. Tainter
  388462     1888    Machine for making           C. S. Tainter
                       paper tubes
  392763     1888    Mounting for diaphragms      C. S. Tainter
                       for acoustical
                       instruments
  393190     1888    Tablet for use in            C. S. Tainter
                       graphophones
  393191     1888    Support for graphophonic     C. S. Tainter
                       tablets
  416969     1889    Speed regulator              C. S. Tainter
  421450     1890    Graphophone tablet           C. S. Tainter
  428646     1890    Machine for the manufacture  C. S. Tainter
                       of wax coated tablets for
                       graphophones
  506348    1893    Coin controlled graphophone   C. S. Tainter
  510656    1893    Reproducer for graphophones   C. S. Tainter
  670442    1901    Graphophone record            C. S. Tainter
                       duplicating machine
  730986    1903    Graphophone                   C. S. Tainter

CONTENTS OF SMALL CHEST RECEIVED BY THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION FROM
MRS. LAURA F. TAINTER, 1947

Books (10) containing the home notes, volumes 1 to 8 and 11 and 12,
    inclusive, March 1881-November 1883. (Vols, 9, 10, and 13 were burned
    in a laboratory fire, September 1897.)

Binder containing drawings and notes for multiple record duplicator,
    October 8, 1897-1908, and miscellaneous inquiries, log, telegraph
    recorder, diet, home plans.

Binder containing printed specifications of patents, S. Tainter, A. G.
    Bell, and C. A. Bell, June 29, 1880 to June 16, 1903.

Medal, Exposition Internationale d'Electricite, Paris, 1881, marked
    "Tainter."

Medal, Panama-Pacific Exposition, San Francisco, 1915, Medal of Award.

Seven purple lapel rosettes (?), one with ribbon and palms, in boxes
    marked "1890." Notes in newspaper clipping.

Records of testimony of C. S. Tainter in various suits involving the
    phonograph: Volta Graphophone Co. _vs._ Columbia Phonograph Co.,
    no. 14533, Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, dated January 13,
    1894; American Graphophone Co. _vs._ U. S. Phonograph Co., U. S.
    Circuit Court, New Jersey, dated May 14, 1895; American Graphophone Co.
    _vs._ Edw. H. Amet, U. S. Circuit Court, Northern District, Illinois,
    in equity, dated February 14, 1896; American Graphophone Co. _vs._
    U. S. Phonograph Co., _et al._, U. S. Circuit Court, New Jersey, in
    equity, no date; American Graphophone Co. _vs._ Leeds _et al._, U. S.
    Circuit Court, Two District, New York, N. Y., no date; testimony marked
    "Questions asked in Edison Co. suits" (duplicate copies) no date, no
    citation.

CONTENTS OF SMALL CHEST RECEIVED BY THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION FROM
MRS. LAURA F. TAINTER, 1950

Typed manuscript--"Memoirs of Charles Sumner Tainter" (plus many
    photostats of notes and articles) 4-1/2 inches thick, pp. 1-71 to
    about 1878, pp. 1 to 104 to factory at Bridgeport, some pages missing.

Box--containing handwritten notes for "memoirs" includes copies of text
    of above (less photostats); copies of short biography; agreement
    creating American Graphophone Co.; letter of election to life
    membership in the American Association for the Advancement of Science.

Binder--exhibits of Tainter drawings in American Graphophone Co. _vs._
    Edison Phonograph Works., vol. 1, U. S. Circuit Court, New Jersey.

Folder--clippings and photostats relating to the machines deposited in
    Smithsonian.

Certificate of appointment "Officer de l'Instruction publique," France,
    October 31, 1889, for exhibition of Graphophone, Exposition
    Universelle, 1889.

Framed photo of Berliner & Tainter, 1919.

Photo of Tainter, 1919.

Separate package containing gold medal, certificate, Panama-Pacific
    Exposition, San Francisco, 1915; gold medal, certificate, Exposition
    Internationale Electricite, Paris, 1881.



# Footnotes {-}

[1] Charles Sumner Tainter (1854-1940), "The talking machine and some
little known facts in connection with its early development,"
unpublished manuscript in the collections of the U. S. National Museum.

[2] One of the most interesting prophecies was written in 1656 by Cyrano
de Bergerac, in his _Comic history of the states and empires of the
Moon_:

"'I began to study closely my books and their covers which impressed me
for their richness. One was decorated with a single diamond, more
brilliant by far than ours. The second seemed but a single pearl cleft
in twain.

"'When I opened the covers, I found inside something made of metal, not
unlike our clocks, full of mysterious little springs and almost
invisible mechanisms. 'Tis a book, 'tis true, but a miraculous book,
which has no pages or letters. Indeed, 'tis a book which to enjoy the
eyes are useless; only ears suffice. When a man desires to read, then,
he surrounds this contrivance with many small tendons of every kind,
then he places the needle on the chapter to be heard and, at the same
time, there come, as from the mouth of a man or from an instrument of
music, all those clear and separate sounds which make up the Lunarians'
tongue.'" (See A. Coeuroy and G. Clarence, _Le phonographe_, Paris,
1929, p. 9, 10.)

[3] Tainter retained a lifelong admiration for Alexander Graham Bell.
This is Tainter's description of their first meeting in Cambridge: "...
one day I received a visit from a very distinguished looking gentleman
with jet black hair and beard, who announced himself as Mr. A. Graham
Bell. His charm of manner and conversation attracted me greatly...."
Tainter, _op. cit._ (footnote 1), p. 2.

[4] A. G. Bell apparently spent little time in the Volta Laboratory. The
Dr. Bell referred to in Tainter's notebooks is Chichester A. Bell. The
basic graphophone patent (U. S. patent 341214) was issued to C. A. Bell
and Tainter. The Tainter material reveals A. G. Bell as the man who
suggested the basic lines of research (and furnished the money), and
then allowed his associates to get the credit for many of the inventions
that resulted.

[5] Tainter, _op. cit._ (footnote 1), p. 3.

[6] _Ibid._, p. 5.

[7] _Ibid._, p. 30.

[8] As quoted by _The Washington Herald_, October 28, 1937.

[9] Tainter, _op. cit._ (footnote 1), pp. 28, 29.

[10] The basic distinction between the first Edison patent, and the Bell
and Tainter patent of 1886 was the method of recording. Edison's method
was to _indent_ the sound waves on a piece of tin-foil (wax was included
as a recording material in his English patent); the Bell and Tainter
improvement called for _cutting_ or "_engraving_" the sound waves into a
wax record, with a sharp recording stylus.

The strength of Bell and Tainter patent is indicated by the following
excerpt from a letter written by a Washington patent attorney, S. T.
Cameron, who was a member of the law firm which carried on litigation
for the American Graphophone Co. The letter is dated December 8, 1914,
and is addressed to George C. Maynard, Curator of Mechanical Technology,
U. S. National Museum: "Subsequent to the issuance of the Bell and
Tainter patent No. 341214, Edison announced that he would shortly
produce his 'new phonograph' which, when it appeared, was in fact
nothing but the Bell and Tainter record set forth in their patent
341214, being a record cut or engraved in wax or wax-like material,
although Edison always insisted on calling this record an 'indented'
record, doubtless because his original tin-foil record was an 'indented'
record. Edison was compelled to acknowledge that his 'new phonograph'
was an infringement of the Bell and Tainter patent 341214, and took out
a license under the Bell and Tainter patent and made his records under
that patent as the result of that license."

# Postscript {-}

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DEVELOPMENT OF THE PHONOGRAPH AT
ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL'S VOLTA LABORATORY***


******* This file should be named 30112.txt or 30112.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/0/1/1/30112



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

